---
layout: post
title: Integrate MSTR with Okta via SAML
---

MicroStrategy's directions for [enabling single sign-on with SAML](https://www2.microstrategy.com/producthelp/10.11/SystemAdmin/WebHelp/Lang_1033/Content/Admin/enabling_single_sign_on_with_saml_authentication.htm#Configur) 
are actually pretty good.  MSTR bundles Spring Security with SAML support and provides directions for how to 
enable it by editing `web.xml`.

On the Okta side, a few things that were non-obvious.  First,
 [configuring a SAML application in Okta](https://developer.okta.com/standards/SAML/setting_up_a_saml_application_in_okta)
 requires going switching to the "classic" UI, which you might miss if you're reading the directions too quickly.

 Second, Okta does not give you a way to upload SP metadata.  So I had to copy the fields from the MSTR-generated
 SP metadata into the Okta form fields:

* "Single sign on URL" in Okta should come from the `AssertionConsumerService` in the SP metadata.  This will be 
 a URL ending in `/saml/SSO`.
* "Audience URI" in Okta will come from the entity ID in the SP metadata and will look like the base URL of your
application. 
* Under "advanced settings" the signature algorithm should be set to "RSA-SHA256" to match `MstrSamlConfig.xml`

Okta *does* give you IdP metadata that you can paste into the `IDPMetadata.xml`, which will include the Okta IdP 
URLs and the certificate containing the public key to validate the SAML response signature.

# Admin screens 

Another important thing to remember: MSTR SAML integration will take over *all* authentication including admin
screens (`/mstrWebAdmin`).  All requests are intercepted by Spring Security before they get to MSTR. This means

* your MSTR Web admin users need to be full-fledged Okta users and authenticate through Okta rather than `tomcat-users.xml` (this is on the whole, an improvement in terms of security)

* MSTR Web admins need to belong to a group called "MSTRAdmin" in Okta and you need to add the same group name to the 
`adminGroups` element in `MstrSamlConfig.xml`

* Additionally, you need to make sure Okta exposes the user groups under "group attribute statements", 
and you need to edit the `groupAttributeName` element in `MstrSamlConfig.xml` to match the attribute coming from Okta.

These points about configuring groups were *not* so well documented. 

# Customization

I found that I could continue to use ESM modules with SAML to inject custom behavior at login, such as creating or
updating MSTR users on demand -- for example, changing group memberships dynamically.  I overloaded
 `handlesAuthenticationRequest` to inject my custom behavior, and return `super.handlesAuthenticationRequest` at the 
 end.  The default security handler will create the session properly based on the SSO user; MSTR's handlers registered
 with Spring Security (`SAMLProcessingFilterWrapper`) will set the SSO user in the HTTP session for MSTR's default 
 trusted auth handlers to see.  

 I also experimented with dynamically changing the IdP URL in Okta to delegate authentication to a separate 
third-party IdP (federated SSO) instead of Okta handling the username and password.  Effectively what I was trying to 
do was replace the URL in the `IDPMetadata.xml` at runtime with a slightly different URL - pre-pending 
`/sso/saml2/:idpId` into the Okta URL before `/app/:app-location/:appId/sso/saml`

In order to do this, I made a subclass of `WebSSOProfileImpl` and overloaded `sendMessage` to look at the 
HTTP request parameters and conditionally replace the `Endpoint` with a wrapped object that replaces
the URL specified in the IdP metadata.  There is probably a better way to do this, though.

```
public class WebSSOProfile extends org.springframework.security.saml.websso.WebSSOProfileImpl {
       
       @Override
       protected void sendMessage(SAMLMessageContext context, boolean sign)
                     throws MetadataProviderException, SAMLException, MessageEncodingException {
              String param = ((HttpServletRequestAdapter)context.getInboundMessageTransport()).getParameterValue("foo");
              final Endpoint endp = context.getPeerEntityEndpoint();
                           
              if (param != null && param.equals("bar")) {
                     String newUrl = endp.getLocation().replace("/app", "/sso/saml2/my_idp_id/app");
                     context.setPeerEntityEndpoint(new EndpointWrapper(endp, newUrl));    
              }
              
              super.sendMessage(context, sign);
       }
       
       private static class EndpointWrapper implements Endpoint {
              private final Endpoint delegate;
              private final String overrideLocation;
              
              public EndpointWrapper(Endpoint delegate, String overrideLocation) {
                     this.delegate = delegate;
                     this.overrideLocation = overrideLocation;
              }
              public String getLocation() {
                     return this.overrideLocation;
              }
                // ... more delegate methods ...
        }
}
```

